# Let's imagine the new way of politics

I like to think about many things. Right now, I am into politics, though not in a traditional sense. We have been conditioned to choose many times. We must decide right & wrong, good & evil, this & that. I wonder if reality is binary. Certainly not, but our current conditions certainly seem so. The country's people are forced into dichotomies of good & evil, left & right, informed & ignorant. But the social problems we have been dealing with for decades, we need to see things differently, act in a new way, and try something we have never done before.  

Let's start from the beginning. As we investigate the human history of social development, it always seemed to have a hierarchy based on powers & duties or roles & responsibilities. Almost all societies in human history as we know it have been divided into the ruling class and the working class. But deep down, we understand that every human desires to live with at least the same dignity and opportunity as any other. In complex social interactions, many conflicts have resulted in bloody, violent revolutions like The French Revolution or The Russian Revolution. Our country, India, too, had to fight against the exploitative regime of colonialism with a similar spirit. Eventually, our desire for equality won over the oppressive and exploitative hierarchy. And we thus got democracy, a holy grail of societal reforms where everyone is granted liberty, equality and fraternity.  

What do we have now? We have the right to decide the laws and policies where everyone has equal vote value. Being a large population, there was a need for republican democracy, and we could choose our representatives by our votes through periodic elections to decide the laws and policies on our behalf. Indeed, we have come a long way from the divine power of kings to democratic republics. Many people think today's politicians are equivalent to kings in older times, but that's an oversimplified and misleading picture of today's democratic system. In fact, our democracy is built upon institutions like legislative, executive, judiciary, media, election commission, and other pressure groups. These different institutions are supposed to work together to ensure the country's harmony. Our constitution has assured that power division is made fair, and they have proper vigilance in each other. We must ask some questions. Is everyone okay now? Is everything okay now? Is everyone getting the same opportunity of being educated? Is every family able to generate enough resources for their needs? Is society free from fear? Does a sense of order exist within natural balances? I don't need to answer these questions.   

It is precisely here we need a paradigm shift. We need to get out of the dichotomy of black and white and classify people as good and evil. In fact, I may criticize the current prime minister, but if I were given his position, I might perform even worse. We love to find mistakes in others, but the more challenging practice is to find the problem in the system which creates the problems in the first place. As Einstein said, "We cannot solve our problems with the same level of thinking that created them." Like we have advanced in science, technology, and trade, we have yet to do so in the social dimension. “Chaand pe paani dhundh liya hamne, par dharti pe khushi nahi dhoondh paaye bro.” We need social scientists and engineers. We do not just have to study society passively. We should identify and solve social problems with a creative and innovative mindset. Right now, I want to address the presence of criminals and nepotism in politics and the absence of structured ways of finding competent leaders.  

I agree that at the time our constitution was created, the majority of the people were illiterate, and it would have been unjustified to rob them of their opportunities to serve the nation and help their people. But it has been more than 70 years since, and still, there are no constraints on the leaders' selection criteria. The comparison may not be fair, but there seems to be a significant drop in the quality of words the leaders used in their speeches. Needless to say, this loose end backfired. Democracy gives everyone equality in terms of dignity and opportunity, but can we agree that everyone is equally competent to be a leader? At worst, this open door invited unsocial elements into power. Can any person from the middle class compete in elections without any fear?  

How do we even fix it? Of course, we cannot even expect them to make laws which are not favourable to them. But one does have the right to form a political party. Just think how many youths are studying hard to compete for many exams. They can be much more talented and visionary than any average politician. We can make an examination which helps us find the best talents. You might ask, "How can we guarantee that qualifying candidates would have integrity and commitment?" That is our problem. I wonder if there is one single exam that successfully determines one's character. But should it stop us from finding a way to solve the problem? In what profession is there a need for people with bad morals? Do we really need such evil people as doctors, engineers, army, or any other professionals? We do draw a line somewhere, we do take exams and interviews to find the best possible candidate, even for a post of peon, and there is none for a leader who decides society's fate. Not qualifying for exams like JEE or UPSC does not necessarily mean he cannot be a good engineer or IAS officer. However, qualifying for the exams and interviews increases the chances of getting a better candidate.  

But there are further questions. What kind of exams should it be? What do we want in a candidate? Do we really need a person who can give an excellent speech? Do we need a person who is very smart in appearance? Do we need a person who is good at manipulating the masses? Do we really need someone who can see many problems and strongly criticize the power holders as our democratic rights are offered? We should test a candidate based on our needs. The kind of people we need are the people who are problem solvers and thinkers. These people should be able to understand and analyze the deeper problems in the functioning of the societal system, think of a better or the best solution, and implement a clear path to that solution. They need not be good orators. They will be just as human as any other one, and they can make mistakes like any others. But the better candidates will be the ones who can accept, admit, and learn from their own mistakes. A person with excellent analytical thinking, creativity, expertise, and humility definitely would do much better. A combination of UPSC and rigorous SSB-like interviews may satisfy our needs.  

Would just choosing people from examinations be enough? How should the selected candidate work in the political party? The candidates selected through the test will undoubtedly have better potential, but if they are doing well, this needs to be evaluated periodically. We need to create an independent system to monitor and assess their work and a feedback mechanism so that this whole system keeps improving. A written and transparent party constitution can pave the way for better democracy within the party. Finally, the party must have a concise goal, and all decisions should be consistent with those goals.   

Here, I need your support to build an imaginary party constitution. Let's go for mental gymnastics, brush up your understanding of political science and contribute in any way you think. Find the GitHub link for the party constitution in the description and leave your suggestions in the comments. 